All right.
Good morning. Good morning.
I'll see you again, Victoria and Luke. Yes, yes.
Great to have you along with us today for, uh, the start
of our consideration of the agreement under the United
Nations Convention Law of Sea
and the conservation of sustainable use of marine,
biological diversity of areas beyond national jurisdiction.
And we'll just go with BB and J for that. Yes. No.
So thanks for coming along today.
We look forward to your, um, your information,
your introduction comments on that.
We have half an hour set down for consideration of that.
Um, we've received the National interest analysis, uh,
and your commentary alongside that.
I welcome your comments,
and then I'm sure there'll be views from members
as well. Thank you.
Well, well, good morning to the committee.
Um, as you've commented, uh, Mr.
Chair, you already have all the relevant, um, paperwork.
So I thought I would just, um, outline a few key points
and then answer questions.
Uh, the bb
and j agreement is a key implementing agreement under the UN
Convention on the Law of the Sea, uh,
which is a really important international
agreement for New Zealand.
Um, the bb and j agreement was adopted by consensus,
which is quite a remarkable achievement in the current, um,
international negotiating environment.
And it was done so
after many years of complex negotiations
with the most intense period of negotiations taking place
between 2018 and 2023.
Uh, the agreement fills gaps in the unclos system, uh,
and by providing the tools
and systems necessary to protect high seas by diversity
in areas beyond national jurisdiction.
And by that, uh, we mean, uh, the high seas, uh, beyond, uh,
exclusive economic zones
and what is called the area with a capital A, uh,
which is the seabed beyond the end of the continental shelf.
In New Zealand's case, uh, over a hundred, uh,
states have signed the agreement, um,
and, uh, including many of our closest partners.
There are currently 15 states, uh, which have ratified
and a large number of others
that are well progressed in their ratification process.
The agreement is expected, uh, to enter into force in early,
uh, 2026.
Um, the overall objective of the agreement is
to ensure conservation
and sustainable use of marine biological, uh, diversity,
uh, in these areas beyond national jurisdiction
through effective implementation of Unclos,
the UN Convention of the Law of the Sea, and,
and further international cooperation and coordination.
Um, I won't go into the four substantive parts
that form the backbone of the agreement
because I think that though they are clearly, uh, set out,
uh, in the, uh, documents you had before you,
but just to, I would like to emphasize, um,
that becoming party to the agreement supports a number
of significant strategic legal, economic
and environmental interests for New Zealand.
And these interests include upholding the central centrality
of the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea
and strengthening its governance framework, uh, New Zealand
maintaining influence on ocean's issues of importance
to our region and to the international rules-based order
contributing to vital efforts to, uh,
protect marine biodiversity
and promoting greater cooperation in global marine science
research and innovation.
Um, and one of the key advantages
for New Zealand ratifying the agreement in a timely manner
is our ability to ensure that future decisions taken
by the mechanisms set up under the BB
and j agreement will advance our national interests.
And that includes influencing how this agreement, um,
and interacts with other ocean governance frameworks
of importance to us, uh, particularly the interaction
between this agreement
and regional fisheries management organizations
and this agreement and the Antarctic treaty system,
which I know is well known, uh, to this committee.
Um, in order to fulfill the obligations under the agreement,
uh, there will be a need for implementing legislation.
Um, and there will also be a need
to develop some new regulatory tools
to ensure New Zealand remains compliant
with the notification reporting
and other requirements of the agreement.
Uh, there are some costs associated, uh,
with joining the agreement, uh,
but these are expected, uh, to be small, uh, given that are,
it only applies to areas beyond national jurisdiction.
Uh, New Zealand could ratify the agreement once the
parliamentary treaty examination process has been completed,
uh, and implementing legislation has passed.
Um, now the National Interest Analysis, uh,
goes into this in, uh, many, uh, in more detail.
Uh, but we are very happy
to answer questions, um, from the committee. Excellent.
Alright. Thank you for your time.
Have we got questions from you? But this,
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair
and I also find it, we in kind of this a very
interesting and unique situation
where we have the party who's negotiating
and also drafting the NIA
and also a submitter, um,
which I think is unlike any other processes that we do see.
Um, my question is around the interaction
between this particular agreement
and the global Ocean stream,
and how is that also moving towards protecting
30% of our ocean?
Uh, well, um, the chair, uh, said
that we would call it the BB and J agreement.
Uh, and it is indeed, uh, the most common, uh,
descriptor for it.
The treaty is also informally called the High Seas
Biodiversity Treaty
and, um, by some the Global Oceans Treaty.
So it is indeed one and the same, uh, is my understanding.
Um, and in that case, uh,
please correct me if I'm wrong,
a supplementary question, Mr.
Chair. Um, just going
through the national interest analysis, going
through the NIA and I may have missed it,
but if I have, could you point me out?
Where does the NIA actually that's specify
or state the 30% protection,
The, um, campaign for 30% protection
of, um, the high seas, uh, is not a
explicit part of the agreement.
Uh, so we are not making particular
commitments under the agreement.
However, the agreement does provide the future
framework, which will enable the establishment
of area-based management tools
and NPAs, so is considered to be a vehicle for achieving,
uh, those objectives by many.
One last possibly, but last supplementary question.
So, um, again, um,
apologies if I misunderstood this
and happy for you to clarify,
but my understanding was a big part
and a big sort of area was celebrated under the,
the formerly known Global Oceans Treaty,
and now, um, BNJ was around the 30% protection.
But what you're saying now is that
that is not explicitly part of the BB NJ,
and that is just now BB NJ is a tool
to sort of move towards that.
Doesn't that sort of, in that case, nickel negates
what was originally a very core part
of the Global Ocean Street in terms of that,
that level of, you know, that blanket protection,
The agreement provides the tools
to protect marine biodiversity on the high seas?
Yeah, it doesn't con include any specific targets
or percentages, but it is, uh,
absolutely widely considered to be the vehicle
that provides the tools
and mechanisms to achieve, uh, aims
around marine biodiversity.
Do you know of any other countries, uh, that are party
to the agreement, um, that has made that commitment
to protect, uh, 30% of the ocean
or above 30% of that ocean?
I'm aware that a number of countries have made, uh,
statements around their support, uh, for that.
And if we ratify this particular agreement, is
that something that MFA is gonna be moving towards
as the next step of this?
Like you mentioned,
Following the rat ratification of the agreement, if
that is what occurs, uh, we would see it as a priority
for New Zealand to play a
significant role in all the mechanisms
established under the treaty.
Uh, and we would see that as being important for achieving,
um, achieving the objectives of the treaty,
but would obviously also, uh, be guided by the government
of the day on the priorities on specific issues.
Thank you so much. One more. Damien O'Connor.
Uh, thanks. Do you think this will make any real difference
to IUU phishing?
The agreement doesn't directly, um,
deal with phishing.
In fact, uh, the agreement requires, uh,
a respect for the competencies
of existing regional fisheries management organizations.
Uh, so that is not explicitly its purpose.
It does set up a framework where, uh,
there should be more engagement
and cooperation between the different, um, organizations
that are responsible for activities on the high seas.
And that includes regional fisheries
management organizations.
Uh, if a area based management tool is adopted
by the agreement and the high seas, uh, that indeed, uh,
would have competence over
and, um, would have an impact on fishing in that area.
But that would only happen if there was not already an
existing regional fisheries management organization in place
for the relevant area.
Do you think this just might set up another parking space
for debate that is critical regarding marine biodiversity?
Instead of actually grappling with the real issues around
over exploitation?
The effectiveness
of the agreement will depend on all the parties, uh,
engaging in good faith, uh,
and pursuing the objectives of the treaty, which are indeed
to protect marine biodiversity.
Uh, so it's hard to protect in advance how effective
that will be because it depends on all the members.
Uh, but I do see, uh, the,
as a very significant
and positive development in the, um, UNCLOS framework.
Would it be fair to say that?
Yeah, I mean, you've already shared with us
that it's not focused solely around fisheries management.
It's actually around a number of other aspects in relation
to modernization, I suppose,
or a better grasping of the increased reach
or technology that's available.
Um, and one thing I guess that stood out for me was
the unknown volume.
You know, we're still talking potentially a couple
of million odd unknown species out there
that haven't yet been discovered.
So having some rules around how we might deal
with those sort of things seems like a reasonable step.
And I think, yeah, I guess the question is, you know,
for New Zealand being involved, is that a natural fit with
what you would see from our traditional
perspective environmentally?
From an notion's perspective?
Uh, I would agree, Mr.
Chair, that the focus of the agreement is more on the
vast array of, um, to a large extent unknown
and un understood marine biodiversity, much
of which I understand is, uh, uh, is very tiny
and, um, uh, wrote needs a,
a subject on which, um, scientific knowledge needs
to develop rather than on the more tangible marine
biodiversity that is already being exploited.
So I would certainly agree with you.
Um, New Zealand has always, uh, over decades
played paid co close attention to, uh,
international law.
Regarding oceans, uh, oceans are extremely important, uh,
for us for, for many reasons.
Uh, the UN convention on the Law of the Sea, uh,
is the treaty that guarantees
to us our large maritime domain.
And, uh, the economic resources that come with that.
The rules of the sea are also extremely important, uh,
that they work smoothly
because, um, most of the large part, part
of our goods trade is transported, uh,
via ocean, via oceans.
Uh, so at the higher strategic level, um,
it's a very important area.
We can be heavily impacted by, uh, shipping accidents.
Uh, the environment, uh, is, uh, fragile.
Uh, so participating in this treaty, uh, is an extremely,
uh, natural, uh, thing
for a country like New Zealand to do.
Given our long history, uh, dating back to the early days
of the negotiation of Unclos,
Can you just give us a bit more insight into how you feel
the treaty will provide additional influence
in relation to the Antarctic treaty system?
A key principle of the treaty is that it,
uh, must respect the existing competencies of other,
uh, sectoral, uh, and regional bodies.
Uh, so the Antarctic treaty system, uh, as, um,
this committee knows,
has a even longer history than the law of the SEA Convention.
It's, uh, played a, played a very important role since 1959.
Um, so we would see it as important
that the two systems, the bb and j system
and the Antarctic Treaty system are cognizant, uh, of
what is going on in each domain.
Uh, but we also think it's important
that the Antarctic Treaty system continues
to play its pay its role, um,
and would for the most part, uh, think that the BB
and j uh, competence, uh, would end
where the Antarctic treaty system ums competence begins.
Can you provide an update on the discussions with LAU
as to whether or not New Zealand's
ratification will extend to them?
Mm-hmm. Question.
I think we would've to provide that update in writing.
Um, I'm not sure that we have, um, yet that confirmation,
um, but certainly those
consultations have been taking place. Okay.
Yeah, it would be useful to have an update on that.
Uh, honorable Dam O'Connor. Thank you.
Uh, CB mining, was it part of the early discussions? Indeed.
Do you think this agreement should cover Seabed mining?
Seabed mining in areas beyond national jurisdiction
is regulated by the International Seabed Authority, uh,
which is another branch of the
Unclos family of, um, organizations.
Uh, this agreement, um, will need
to respect again, the competence
of the International CBE Authority,
but it does bring in, um, some clear, uh,
I guess, clear understandings around the importance
of marine biodiversity
and, um, some additional, additional tools.
And the two organizations,
the mechanisms established under the BB
and j will need to work
with the International CBE Authority.
And of course, we are the same members, uh, largely in both,
in both organizations.
So if the country's taken their full set
of obligations into each, uh, each process.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, just again, to, to to guess, to go back
to my point about just having another, um, uh,
parking space, if not cul-de-sac with some
of these discussions, do you think that, um, control
of sea mining
and, um, aspirations around, um,
oceans biodiversity can be disconnected in any way?
Well, the great advantage in, uh,
pursuing the protection
of marine biodiversity under the Unclos framework is
that it does indeed all remain, uh, connected.
And that's of, uh,
considerable strategic importance for New Zealand.
Uh, we want the Unclos regime to, to remain strong
and effective, and we, uh, tend
to look on solutions being developed
outside the Unclos regime as, uh, as damaging to that
and damaging to the way in which Uncross has, um, endured,
uh, for many decades as a kind
of constitution for the oceans.
Do you think that the principles of, um, of
that management outside jurisdiction
or inside the jurisdiction, do you think
that those principles should be consistent?
I think to a large extent they are already,
and you'll find, uh, provisions of the bb and j agreement
and provisions of the way in which the International Sea B
Authority is operating, uh, uh, fundamentally consistent
as they derive from the same treaty framework. Dr. Lauren,
Thank you so much. Um,
I'm still trying to, um, sort
of see if you wouldn't mind helping us, uh,
elucidate the idea of something, a tangible action
that is resulting from us
enacting this particular agreement.
So, so far from what we're hearing is that, you know,
it doesn't really directly ban
or looking at, you know, address the issue of IEU, um,
that the On Damia economy mentioned.
It doesn't specifically mention anything about protection
ocean of oceans, which was under the intentions
of the Global Oceans Treaty.
Um, can I just check one of the, some
of the other submitters also mentions other destructive
fishing practices that does happen on High Sea, such
as bottom trolling.
Does this agreement, at least
as a move towards us addressing these, some of these other
destructive, uh, practices.
And, you know, and on the honorable,
Daniel Con also mentioned seabed mining as well.
So I'm just trying to figure out what is something that is
tangible that we can talk about?
One of the, um, primary ways
that the treaty is expected
to protect marine biodiversity is through the establishment
of area-based management tools, uh,
particularly marine protected areas.
Up until now, there hasn't been a global system
for establishing marine protected areas in the high seas.
Uh, this is the treaty that establishes, uh, that potential
and that is seen to be, uh, one of the, uh,
most tangible and positive ways
that the treaty will contribute to the same.
And I expect that once the treaty enters into force,
there will be a, uh, big movement of cooperation
to try and prove the treaty's worth by establishing some
of these marine protected areas, uh,
in a way that they make a difference.
Okay. So, um, sorry,
You costley, just a supplementary on that one.
Would that, would that you got Yeah, yeah.
So on the NPAs, would that be the kind of comidex proposal
that that has been talked about? Although that's
The MPAs, uh, would be in areas
beyond national jurisdiction.
So, uh, quite different from, uh, the example you've cited.
Um, it would potentially be a more similar to, I actually,
I, I'm not sure. Are there other,
You're talking a whole, like a
Pacific Forum though, right?
You're talking sort of quite big picture.
Yeah, big picture. They would need to, um,
be adopted under the, the mechanisms of the new treaty.
So there are decision making processes.
There are, uh, guidelines around, uh,
what an MPA should cover, you know, how it should work,
and they will be further evolved
through the mechanisms of the treaty.
But that is one of the, you know, the key, uh,
new exciting areas that, um, this treaty, uh, will achieve,
I guess. Sorry, supplementary
that you just follow from what I was mentioning before.
You mentioned in terms of this sort of new global body
and that's being created as a result
that has potential being created as a result of this.
What sort of, for lack of better words, what, what sort
of teeth would this body have in addressing some of these?
Because we've seen, we do see a lot of international, um,
bodies being created, but it's come to geopolitics.
It's, uh, at risk of, you know, countries pulling out,
pulling, being pulled in.
Um, you know, us recently is talking about pulling
out of the Paris agreement.
So what then tangible teeth would this have in holding
things like IUU, things like bottom trolling,
things like seabed mining, mining accountable.
The UN Convention on the Law of the Sea, uh, has, uh,
quite a, an effective and strong dispute settlement system.
So the core obligations are legally binding on members.
Uh, this is also a binding treaty.
Uh, so has this the same, the same force.
Um, and, uh, there's every reason
to think, uh, that it will be effective.
There's a, there's a large, um,
common interest in protecting marine biodiversity.
Next question. And that was evidenced by the fact that, uh,
although the negotiations were quite protracted
and complex, in the end, it was adopted by consensus
and all the countries in the
world were in the room in there.
Very good. Tim Costley.
Yeah, I'll, I'll, we sort of touched on,
so my mom was gonna be around that sort of the teeth in it,
and if the and costs mechanisms are quite that,
that's what you just said they do.
So let me just try and wrap my mind together.
I'll, I'll break it down to a bit of an elevator pitch
for the, for the average kiwi, like me, uh, very average,
um, this effectively is about establishing
forums, particularly regionally based forums like in the
Pacific, focused on bio sustainability of that bio,
those areas of biodiversity beyond national jurisdictions.
And it seeks to do that through cooperation
and consultation that is, and,
and the extent that the law of the seas mechanisms apply
to how that's implemented.
Enforced. What, what am I missing there? I think
That's partly right,
but actually this is a global forum for
mechanisms to be adopted for tools
and mechanisms to be adopted
to protect marine biodiversity at a global level, yes,
but the mechanisms may be regional,
but the key thing is if they ag are agreed on at a global
level, there is a wider buy-in, uh, given
that the areas covered by the treaty Yeah.
Are, um, crossed
and used by a great many, um, from many countries. Yeah.
When you talk Pacific, great Atlantic, there's huge areas.
Yeah. Um, uh, but there aren't specific tools yet.
This is establishing the forum and, and the pathway to that,
or are there specific tools that come in on day one
that say you're gonna have to go in?
No, this is establishing the mechanisms Yes.
To create these tools.
There are some obligations that would come in on day one,
uh, in the area of environmental impact assessments.
Uh, the Law of the SEA Treaty contains some broad
obligations on environmental impact assessments,
but they have never been, uh, made operational
or well articulated.
The treaty does that
and will require, um, a higher standard
of environmental impact assessment
before activities are conducted in the high seas.
Because I think there's some, some of, to some of, um, Dr.
Nan's points, you know,
that general interest from the public.
Yeah. How are we actually gonna stop seabed mining?
How are we gonna stop some other, um, uh, actor coming in,
you know, taking resources
that might not be in our national jurisdiction,
but just over the border of it.
And, and, and so yeah.
But there's, there's not,
we're not at that stage yet, are we?
This is setting up the mechanism,
which is gonna apply globally,
but which will be eventually operationalized in
our, in our area of
Interest. Yes. With
a focus on marine biodiversity, uh,
rather than some of the areas which are well regulated.
Well, resource shipping is well regulated,
fishing is quite well regulated, but there are gaps.
You know, the whole globe is not covered
by regional fishery management organizations
by any means. Thank you. That's,
That's really helpful.
All right, next question, Laura. I'm clear. Thank
You. And Simon
kind of follows on from terms,
and it's a little bit about the infrastructure of
what it will look like from day one.
So do we, from our end, do you have, um, experts appointed
that will be representing us,
and how does that actually look like?
So we have this framework in place.
Have you got the resource, the expert,
and done that part of the work behind it to be able to come
to that table, um,
and maybe potentially take a lead on some
of these things from a New Zealand perspective?
That's a really good question.
Um, the first stage, uh, between now
and entry into force,
and probably for a short period of time
after entry into force mm-hmm.
Is on establishing the, um,
the structure, the, and the committees
and the processes that will operate, uh,
the treaty sets out, uh, how these will work.
But they still need to be adopted
and be given terms of reference.
Uh, I think, um, we are well resourced, uh,
to participate in that.
The team that engaged in the negotiations, uh, which I led,
uh, had participation from the ministry
for primary industries, from the Department of Conservation,
um, the main ones,
Uh, in terms of Ministry for Environment at, at times,
uh, so we are well coordinated across government.
Uh, we had input, uh, from a wider range of organizations,
uh, such as, um, it's hard to envisage exactly
what the human resourcing requirements would be
for attendance at the processes, um,
once they're up and running.
Uh, and I would imagine our engagement, uh,
would on specific issues would depend a little bit on the,
um, on the importance at the time of that issue.
So if we were working, for example, with our Pacific Island,
uh, partners on establishing something in the Pacific Ocean,
uh, you can imagine that would require quite,
quite a focus for a while.
Uh, we might be, uh, watching,
but less, uh, sort
of hands-on if something was being developed in the North
Atlantic, but obviously it would be important to, uh,
participate and understand.
Very good. Um,
I always get a little nervous when I see the words,
there will be some costs associated with this.
Um, can you give us some insight into what sort
of number that may be?
Obviously, notwithstanding the comments you've just made
about variability of resources for different pieces,
but have, have you got some insight hopefully around the
anticipated costs?
Yes. The, um, the costs, I guess,
fall into several different buckets.
Uh, like any, uh, treaty regime that establishes,
uh, mechanisms
and a bit of architecture, uh, there are costs
to join the treaty and an annual subscription fee.
Uh, what that depends on what, what that amounts
to will depend on a number of factors, uh,
including the number of parties, uh, at the time, uh,
the treaty enters into force.
Uh, but we do have some indicative figures,
which I think are in the NIA, can you help me with those on
what costs of similar organizations are like, uh,
we are talking about costs that in other organizations such
as the Antarctic Treaty system,
the International Seabed Authority range from kind
of 40,000 to New Zealand per annum through to
the low hundreds.
I think, um, there is a additional,
um, cost for the bb
and j agreement, which is whatever our subscription annual
subscription is, uh, as a developed country,
we will also make an additional 50% of that into a pool
to support, uh, the capacity for developing countries
to be able to fully implement the agreement.
Uh, and that's, um, was something
that was debated at length in the negotiations.
And one of the areas
where environmental agreements have been seen at times
to fall short is that, uh, some
of the developing countries lack the capacity to implement.
So this is a treaty that is well set up from the start
with inbuilt funding, uh, to support that.
And given, uh, the priority
that our Pacific partners have placed on this agreement
and the importance for them of marine biodiversity, uh,
that's a very positive factor.
So you have, uh, fairly minor costs
of an on an annual basis.
Uh, then, um, there will also need to be, um,
mechanisms for us to comply with our reporting requirements.
Uh, so some additional impost on government,
but relatively minor
and aligned with the types
of things governments departments are doing already.
And then private actors who are wanting
to conduct activities on the high seas, uh, will need
to engage to a certain extent in those
reporting requirements.
If, for example, niwa was collecting, um,
marine biodiversity on the high seas as part
of their research, uh, they will have, um,
some reporting requirements, uh, on them, on them.
Uh, but, uh, it's not
considered a high cost
Treaty, uh, for New Zealand to be part of.
Alright. Look, we've run over time, so we'll call it there.
But thank you very much Victoria
and Luke for your insights today.
Appreciate it. Thank you for the, um, good questions. Yes.
Okay. We'll move now to our next submitter, uh,
the environment and conservation organizations
of New Zealand Incorporated,
who will be joining us via Zoom.
Are they online? They are. Excellent.
All right. I think we have Barry Weber co-chair joining
us. Can you hear us, Barry?
I can indeed. Tato. Um,
Excellent. All
right. Welcome along. We have seen your submission.
Uh, we have 10 minutes set down to hear from you,
and I'm sure members may have questions as well over to you.
Um, thank you again.
Um, and thank you for this opportunity to make a submission
and support of New Zealand ratifying the,
uh, BB and J agreement.
Um, this is an important, uh, uh, agreement.
It's probably the most important, uh, marine treaty
that's been negotiated in the last 30 years.
It's, uh, it was, uh, carefully, uh, I suppose a,
a carefully negotiated treaty given the number of interests
around the planet in different aspects of it.
And, um, um, I would acknowledge the work that, uh,
foreign affairs and others have put into, uh,
negotiating on New Zealand's behalf.
And, um, I was part of the New Zealand delegation,
put a number of the negotiations, whether online,
um, or in person.
Um, so my, my comments are basically in support
of the treaty, uh, just acknowledging
there's four elements of it.
The first element that deals with governing of, um,
marine genetic genetic resources on the high seas.
There's currently no, uh, current arrangement to do
that in terms of managing, uh, biodiversity.
And it's a, and it's a key element.
Um, the, the other el elements of it is, uh, managing, um,
area based management tools,
including marine protected areas.
Um, as, uh, the foreign affairs, um,
reps have said there's no currently no arrangement apart
from in the Antarctic, uh, where, uh, uh, marine, uh,
areas can be protected.
Uh, so there's no, uh, co coherent, uh,
management regime on the high seas.
And there are also gaps in the, in the system in terms of,
uh, regional fisheries management organizations, um, if,
if those bodies, if, uh,
adopted any compet competency in that area.
And most body, most of the RFMOs don't have competency in
terms of marine protection.
Um, and the other elements basically is, um, the,
the issues in regard to, um,
environmental impact assessment,
which you've heard about it, and, uh, capacity building
and technology sharing.
And there's a whole range of mechanisms in the,
in the architecture of the agreement,
which are really important, uh,
including a science and technical body.
Um, there's a clearinghouse mechanism,
which is a really important tool for a range
of issues in terms of, uh, making it,
lowering the cost actually of, uh, understanding, um,
both in terms of environmental impact assessment,
but also in regard to, um, marine genetic resources
and also, um, area based management tools.
So that, those are all really important.
Um, some of that architecture
that's in this agreement is missing in a
number of international agreements.
The UN Fish Stocks Agreement is, is one
of those which is really missing the
more institutional architecture that,
um, this agreement has.
Um, so this is, that's why it's really important.
There's a whole range of other dispute, uh,
arrangements which add
to the un conventional the Law of the Sea.
Um, and I I would also acknowledge the work, um, that, um,
the Pacific Island, uh, countries played in a whole range
of parts of the legislation, including the acknowledgement
of traditional knowledge in the provisions of the treaty.
Um, one of the things I would say, just, um, just responding
to one of the questions that, uh, uh, was asked in regard
to, um, the protection, the, the, the idea of, um,
protecting 30% of the Marines area under the, um,
convention on bi, uh, biological diversity.
Um, this arrangement would allow for, um,
for marine protected areas
to be established on the high seas in areas
where they currently c can't be,
which isn't basically everything outside of the Antarctic,
uh, outside of, um, camel laws waters.
That's the convention on the conservation
of Antarctic marine living resources.
So that's, that's, um, so it's a really important treaty,
uh, by being on the ground floor, um,
by ratifying the treaty early, it would allow us, uh,
now New Zealand to be involved in that process.
Um, there's a range of pre prep comms being established, um,
starting in April this year.
Um, another one later in the year,
and also, uh, one established in, in sometime in, in, um,
2026.
And it's really important that we're part of
that, part of that process.
And there's clearly a, a whole range of countries who, um,
getting involved, um, both in signing the treaty,
it's over 107 countries
and ratifying the treaty 15 countries have so far ratified,
it requires 60 to come into force.
Um, there's a whole initiative going on in the EU at the
moment, uh, to ratify, as far as I know,
the EU itself has now passed all its things it needs to,
to ratify, and it's waiting on a number
of its member states to do that.
So there's a whole, uh, initiative going on
for the un oceans, uh, uh, treaty, uh, sorry,
un oceans meeting, um, happening un o happening, um, uh,
uh, in the first half of this year.
And a number of countries have made commitments to, uh,
ratify the convention prior to that.
So open to any questions,
and thanks very much for the committee to, uh, listening to,
um, and accepting our submission.
Thanks.
Excellent. Thank you very much for taking the
time to submit on this.
Do we have questions for Mr. Weber submission?
Yeah, pretty, pretty straightforward.
So obviously you're advocating what I pick up
for a prompt ratification, uh,
and New Zealand, uh, seating that treaty
That that's correct.
And, um, it will be, uh, well seen in the Pacific, uh,
of New Zealand ratifying the treaty given the strong support
in the Pacific for, um, for the treaty itself. Thanks.
Yes. And so two Pacific Island Forum nations
so far have ratified correct.
Palau and FC,
That that's correct. And
there's a whole bunch of discussions going on
amongst other Pacific Island countries in terms of
what they need to do to ratify the convention.
And, um, uh, we, we expect a number of the other parties
to be, to ratify, um,
this certainly in the first half of this year.
Thanks.
Excellent. Uh, quick question from Dr.
Lauren Nan and then honorable Damien O'Connor.
Um, Kiara Barry, thank you so much.
Um, just a very quick question.
I don't know if you heard the previous submitter, um,
from MFA as well,
but I will be interested
to hear if you wouldn't mind elaborating on
what do you think, uh, the accountability should be
for this particular agreement?
Sorry, the question of accountability?
Yes. Oh, maybe I should use this mic. Yeah,
Sorry. Um,
well, well, the convention, uh, the agreement is,
is signed, has a whole bunch of arrangements within it.
Um, so there's a accountability mechanisms within the
convention and, um, countries.
It will, will basically allow certainly, um,
discussions globally on a whole, a range of issues in regard
to protection of biodiversity and the scientific
and technical body will add to it.
And also the way it's been set up, the architecture
and how it interacts with, for example,
regional fisheries management organizations is,
is quite innovative
and it will allow for basically dialogue, uh,
on a global basis with RFMOs and other agencies.
And I think that's a really important part
of the mechanism that's established.
So there'll be both, I suppose, global accountability
as well as reasonable, uh,
accountability established within the agreement. Thanks.
Thank you. Can I look, look,
thank you very much, Barry.
And you've said here the provision include the recognition
of traditional knowledge.
Did, did that discussion crossover into what we would call
or refer to sometimes as traditional rights, um, for, uh,
groups across all those Pacific countries.
And indeed, um, for,
It was really limited to, to the knowledge space,
although the sort of rights component was certainly at,
at different stages was part of the dialogue.
Um, but there's clearly in terms of the high seas is
how you deal with, um, you know, traditional, um,
traditional knowledge, um, and engagement.
And it, it was certainly a strong, strongly supported
by Pacific Island states to ensure that their interests
and their traditional interests was acknowledged, um,
within the treaty itself.
And I think that's a real, really important
and quite an innovative, um, move within the, within the,
um, architecture of the, um, of marine,
um, treaties. Thanks.
Thanks. Excellent. All right.
Thank you very much for your time. Appreciate that.
And, uh, thank you. We'll continue further consideration
of this bill next week.
Uh, we'll move now to our initial assessment
of the International Treaty examination
of the US Tuna Treaty Amendments to annex two
of the treaty on fisheries between the governments
of certain Pacific Island states
and the government of the United States of America.
I might call that one the US Tuna Treaty.
What's the acronym for this one?
So we stay in public session.
Uh, we are hearing firstly from MFA on this, uh, followed
by another submitter on line, uh, MFA and NPI, I believe
Kia,
Um, parliament to June chair,
and to the members of the committee, um, uh, Koto.
Uh, I'll just, uh, welcome the opportunity
to have this conversation today.
I just thought I might, um, introduce some of my colleagues
who are here supporting this, this, uh, discussion.
So Art Tomski has been doing, uh, the, the lion's share
of the, of the legal work around this.
And my colleague Andrea Gilbride here is, uh,
is in my fisheries team, uh, working, uh, very closely
with the, the FFA
and with the Western Central Pacific
Pacific Fisheries Commission.
Um, with your permission, we, uh,
thought we might just give you a bit of an introduction
of maybe about, uh, seven or eight minutes.
Um, and, uh, open up then to questions
and discussions on the things that are, that are obviously
of your, of interest to you.
Um, thanks again for the invitation.
Um, this, um, treaty is, uh,
more than just about a technical, uh, process.
Um, the, um, we think of tuna in the Pacific
as a currency of influence, uh, where the fish go.
Uh, a lot of decision rights go, a lot of influence goes,
and of course, a lot of the wellbeing
of Pacific Island countries who are parties to the treaty.
So, um, we also seek this US tuna treaty within the geo
strategy of the region, which as you will observed,
is going, um, in all some
very interesting directions at the moment.
That's one of the reasons this treaty matters
to New Zealand, even though the commercial advantages, uh,
to us, uh, uh, really passed on to talk aloud.
Um, so really, I think, um, to talk about that, uh,
that geostrategic significance about the, the role
that the treaty can play in building regional solidarity,
which was one of the drivers for New Zealand's, uh,
when we signed up for the treaty, what was it,
37 years ago now, um, we think that is an important aspect
of this consideration as well.
Pacific, as you'll have read from your briefing,
is the world's, uh, tuna capital, um, the, the RMFO,
the Western Central Pacific Fisheries Commission.
That's, uh, that contains the, uh, the,
the 16 members Pacific members of, uh,
of the US Tuna Treaty.
That's, that's a subset of that,
but that also includes Southeast Asia and North Asia.
Um, but having said that, you know,
of the 6 billion US dollars of tuna caught in, that's, uh,
that, that wider area, um, more than half of that, uh,
is caught in the, in the waters of the South Pacific.
So the, uh, US Tuna Treaty is obviously, um,
an instrument in a very important part of, of, uh,
the global tuna industry, not just the, the Pacific.
Um, obviously, fisheries are vital to the revenues, jobs,
livelihoods, nutrition and food security, and the social
and cultural wellbeing of, uh, many Pacific Island countries
and within the New Zealand realm, um,
to hour is a prime example of that.
Um, it participates in the treaty, not not as a, as a party,
uh, but as, um, as part of New Zealand realm.
And as I said, the, you know, the, the financial, um, uh,
benefits of the treaty are passed straight on to Toola.
It is one of the four major, um, fisheries, if you like, uh,
fish rich, um, waters in, in the, in the 16,
in the 16 plus talk our members of, of the treaty, uh,
plus the United States.
Um, so the, the treaty itself,
and we've given you some background on that, so I don't,
don't plan to rake over that,
but, you know, it was, uh, came into force in 1988,
so it's had a, a long time to prove its value.
Um, it's, uh, it was really the result of trying
to regularize and put on a, on a more stable footing,
the relationships, uh, between the US fishing fleet,
which in those days was much bigger than it is today.
And the, and the Pacific countries whose waters sort
of teamed with tuna.
Um, New Zealand, as I said,
doesn't participate in the commercial model.
It's not just because we pass our proceeds onto to la we,
we, we also don't have us fishing vessels, um,
fishing in, in our waters.
Um, but the other thing I think that's worth really, um,
lingering on here is that, uh, the US Tuna Treaty
and the money that's transferred under the Associated
Economic Assistance Agreement, it's the most significant
US development package in the Pacific.
And for that reason, um, if for not all the other reasons
as well, it has foreign policy significance.
Um, I don't know whether you recall,
but, um, back in 2022, uh,
president Biden hosted the leaders of the Pacific
to the first yet, um, uh, New Zealand, uh, sorry, the,
the Pacific Islands us, uh, summit.
And at that meeting, um, an announcement was made
that the US would contribute, um,
860 million US dollars over 10 years to the Pacific.
600 million of that comes in under the assistance agreement,
um, of the Tuna Treaty.
So it's a very big, um, part of that, you know, outreach
to the Pacific of, as the,
the United States said at the time, their, their
reemphasis on, on, if you like, returning to the Pacific
with a real statement of intent.
New Zealand passes on, um,
so e each year there's a 60 million share of that
that takes place over 10 years.
And New Zealand passes that on Toal,
and we, we estimate it's around about, uh,
$4 million a year.
So it makes a lot of difference, Toal.
Um, the other area I think that's worth, um, mentioning is
that, uh, under that economic assistance agreement, um,
the intent is that we build the capability
of Pacific Island country so that in, in our view
and the view of many of the Pacific, um, partners, um,
they get a better share of each tuna that's landed.
And that's a pretty important thing when you consider that,
um, more than four fifths of the value of, uh, of,
or more than four fifths of all tuna, according to Pacific,
is processed outside the region.
And the export figures that we included in the,
in the small briefing paper show that most of the, um, most
of the tuna that's sold
to the United States goes out as loins.
Um, most of that comes from Fiji,
which paradoxically is not one of the big fishing, uh,
tuna fishing, um, uh, nations under the treaty.
Uh, so there's a lot of potential we feel
to help the Pacific Island countries, um,
in a way do what's, uh, what we did in the 1980s by moving,
um, our protein sector from volume to value.
If we could help Pacific, um, nations who, who own the fish
to do that with their, with this, this valuable resource,
then that's something that New Zealand can do as a,
as a part party in this treaty.
Um, and as a act of solidarity with specific, um,
it's probably, uh, worth handing over to, um, at Naski
to just go through some of the sort of technical, uh,
details of this and then we can, um, open up
for questions if that's okay with you.
Thank you, Steven and
thank you committee for your time today.
Uh, I'll work through some of the key outcomes
of the amendments impacts for New Zealand
and next steps on the ratification process.
Uh, so it may be worth recapping very briefly some
of the history of the treaty, um,
as these amendments are part,
its incremental evolution over time.
New Zealand is one of 17 parties to the treaty,
and as Stephen mentioned, talk aloud participate
through New Zealand's verification.
Uh, the treaty entered into force in 1988
and has been amended several times since then,
most notably in 2002
and 2016, uh, which has ensured that the treaty remains fit
for purpose and meets parties needs.
Uh, in May last year,
parties concluded NGA negotiations on this most recent set
of amendments, uh,
and these amendments update the commercial model in the
treaty, which is found in annex two, under annex two.
Uh, effectively there's a pool of fishing days
that's available to a US fishing fleet, uh,
and the US fishing fleet fleet has a right
of first refusal for those fishing days.
Previously annex two prescribed fees that would be paid
for those days, uh, under these, um, amendments.
Those fees can now be negotiated
between the US fishing fleet
and, uh, parties or territories. We relevant.
Who's that help though?
Uh, so those are arrangements to provide 'em flexibility
for both parties and were, uh, implemented at the request
of the Pacific parties during the last
round of negotiations.
Uh, and we can maybe get, um, discuss
that a bit further. Uh, yep. Sorry.
Finish up with Kerry. Carry on. Thank you. More questions.
Uh, so, uh, just to say that those, um, those amendments
to annex to are what are being considered today
for treaty examination, uh,
the expected impacts for New Zealand.
So, uh, these amendments don't impose any new obligations,
uh, that apply to New Zealand.
As Stephen mentioned, phishing doesn't occur in
New Zealand waters.
Uh, we will, however, continue to have obligations
with respect to TOLA
because of the fishing that takes place in to LA's Waters,
uh, very briefly to LA's offshore fishery, including access
that's guaranteed under the treaty is managed
by the TOLA Fisheries Management Agency, uh,
under the responsibility of the administrator of Toal LA
and New Zealand legislation.
And all of the obligations can be met
through existing legislation
and new legislative, uh, action is not required
to meet those obligations.
Uh, just very briefly on next steps.
So, uh, these amendments enter into force for all parties.
Once all parties have, uh, notified their acceptance
of the amendments to the depository, uh, Papua New Guinea
and New Zealand must accept the amendment,
so they come into effect for other parties.
Uh, we already have agreement from Toal
to be included in New Zealand's proposed ratification.
Uh, should there be successful conclusion
to the treaty examination process.
And until such time as the amendments come into effect,
there's a, uh, non-binding, uh, memorandum
of understanding which, uh,
implements this commercial model on a
voluntary basis between the parties.
And this MOU is an interim measure, which allows, uh,
the commercial arrangements to continue
and, uh, revenue from, uh, those commercial, uh, uh,
arrangements to continue
and, uh, not be disrupted until such time
as the amendments come into effect, uh, so much as possible
to Stephen for some closing remarks.
Yeah, well, I think, um, we should just open up, uh,
for questions and discussions.
Um, anything that is of interest to you in particular,
but thank you again for the opportunity.
Uh, you know, we see the treaty as a very significant piece
of Pacific architecture
and, uh, new Zealand's very much committed to doing
what we can to make it sit up and breathe.
Excellent. Thank you very much.
First question, honor, Damian O'Connor.
Look, thank you. It's kind of a technical one, really.
And, and I guess the 800 million
or thereabouts, as you said, uh, to come from the us is
that likely to be cut now that,
that President Trump has cut all funding to USA?
Well, he is, uh, he's suspended it, um,
rather than cut at the moment.
So, um, we are still, we have been in touch with, um,
state Department and with the Foreign Fisheries Agency.
Just to clarify what the status is, the,
so the 2024 payment is the first, um, you know,
$60 million tranche that hasn't arrived yet.
And, um, we're trying to make sure that that, uh,
that's not caught in the system,
but the, the, the US response to that has been, um,
unclear so far.
But, uh, I, I guess we are reassured by the fact that this,
um, this package had bipartisan support, um, that, uh,
means that it's, uh, you know, across the hou both houses,
there is, uh, awareness of the importance of this.
Um, and we have heard obviously, uh, very strong, um,
endorsement burden from, um,
Marco Rubio about the importance
of the US relationships with the Pacific.
So that's about all we can say at the moment.
Um, I had a question in relation to the variability of the
license periods in terms of the number of days.
Can you give us some context around whether there has
previously been variation, and we're saying 2,720 days,
but the Republic of KBAs is only allowing 500 days,
so less than a quarter of that time.
Um, and then some variability as well in,
in the Cook Islands only three 50 days
and 600 days, and some others.
So can you give us an insight around that aspect,
and is that normal, uh, or has it changed?
Yeah, um, well, I was part of the process last, uh, in,
in late 2023, um,
which was conducted at ministerial level and,
and I went representing New Zealand, um,
because of, it was too close to the, the election.
Um, and it was a, it was a very much, um, part of a, of
what became quite a contentious negotiation.
Uh, essentially what, uh, the upfront days
and the top up payment due is they guarantee, um,
an income stream for the parties
that receive those upfront days.
And that essentially, um, is concentrated with the parties
to the Maru agreement.
Although islands also benefits quite significantly, um,
what it means is whether the US fleet, which continues
to reduce the number, whether it fishes all those days
or not, so the countries who are party
to those upfront days, they still receive that,
and that includes members of the p
and a who don't actually, uh,
have much fish in their waters.
So in a way, it's a kind of a, um, a guaranteed,
um, stipend.
Uh, and the activity, uh, the US gets to fish
for a certain number of days, um, at, at a discounted rate.
And the top up payment is to, to, um, reflect the fact
that those countries could sell those days
to other countries at a higher price.
Uh, so it's not really, um, material in terms of the,
the income stream, whether the full entitlement is, uh,
has met or not, they still get the same revenue stream.
And so who requested those changes?
And sorry, is that a change from the number ha Has everyone
previously been aligned on the same number
or has there always been variability?
Yes, that's right. Um, the, the,
the number was set quite a bit
before the actual agreement was reached.
And in fact, during the negotiations, one of the things
that we were talking about is, do they need such a high,
a high, you know, sort of, um, locked in entitlement
or could some of those, some of the revenue attached to
that be left in a pool for a distribution, for example,
to the South Pacific countries who in a way have come out
with a, a lesser outcome from negotiation.
Does that answer your question?
Partly? So in, in the instance of AVAs being at 500 days,
was that at their request
or at the US request to have that at,
It was a negotiated outcome, right? Yeah.
Okay. And what was it previously?
I'm not sure what it Was
Previously. You know, Thomas,
we possibly come back in. Yeah.
We, we could come back to you with a, the table that you,
If you Yeah. It would be
interesting just to be able to gauge what sort
of shift we're seeing Yes.
In this, in those numbers, what were they previously
compared to what's proposed under this update for each
of those areas where there is variability?
Sure. Uh, next question. Tim Costley.
Yeah. And you just said it was a negotiated outcome.
Mm-hmm. I guess that's the point I wanna get to,
whether it stays, but in particular, the fees that get paid.
'cause this is, um, significant.
Some of these islands that, that, you know, are looking
for limited areas of actually raising money to look
after their, their, um, population.
Is, is there a risk that when we say, well,
it will just be negotiated that,
that it might be good upfront,
but that these smaller Pacific Islands are gonna struggle at
the negotiating table, um, down track to,
to actually get a, a fair go?
Well, I think that's why we sort of made the point
that this was at the request of the Pacific Island parties.
So for example, Lau, um, tucks in under the,
it's not a member of the parties to the, um, now agreement,
but it pretty much moves with them
and often speaks for them, and
therefore they have that top cover
of the collective strength of the, of the PNA.
But there are other countries, uh, cook Islands,
for example, wanted to have the flexibility
to offer its days at a lower price
because it just to entice the US fleet, um,
into their waters.
But it's easy for the, you know, particularly as the, the,
the US fleet diminishes for their activity
to concentrate on, on the E Zs of countries
where they know there's a, a great concentration of tuna.
Uh, it's in the interest of other members of the,
of the treaty to attract
us vessels further into their waters.
Some are, as another example, they, um, they had, uh,
a small tuna, US tuna catch, which, um,
we think was trolling on the way back
to the fish processing plant in, um,
and they want to be able to essentially offer a,
an inducement
to the US fishing vessels to come into their waters.
So this is sort of fostering competition
between the Pacific Island nations.
It's not, it's not really a competition.
It's, um, there is a complementarity about that.
There's, uh, there's only so many US boats.
There's a, there's a lot of sea
and, um, what's the, um, it sounds like a competition
To the bottom.
Yeah, but It's only for the US though,
Right? Yeah. Yeah. And
That part of the question that I was getting to
around the number of days changing is that in part
because we're seeing an increased presence from other
nations fishing vessels reaching agreement in these eecs,
China will fill the gap. Exactly.
Yeah. Um, yes.
And there, there is a, a large, um,
distant water fishing vessel presence in the region, uh,
China as you identify as, as easily the biggest.
It has about a quarter of all the, um,
all the vessels on fishing in the Pacific,
uh, more than 500.
So that's a good example.
If, um, if the us uh, the US sort of blocks up
through the treaty, it's, uh, it's access right to the water
so that that day cannot be sold to someone else.
Um, it, it, it is recognized through the treaty that
that becomes a negotiated right of theirs.
Um, and the top up payment reflects the fact that, uh, some
of those countries could, could sell
that, uh, day elsewhere. Yeah.
Okay. Dr. Lawrence now, thank you.
Um, I have a couple questions
and, uh, sort of a lot of that is glad to have you here.
A lot of that is around, um, NIA.
Um, is there a reason that the NX two, according to NIA,
did not have any Maori consultation?
I believe, uh, because the no fishing occurs in New
Zealand's exclusive economic zone,
there's no impact on the domestic
fishing industry in New Zealand.
Uh, and primarily, uh, a lot
of New Zealand's activity occurs with Toal.
So Toal was closely consulted
and engaged in the negotiations.
I understand. Uh, but I guess just a general comment
around something like this is,
regardless if it's within domestic waters
or not being the indigenous people of Otero, we kind of,
particularly in terms of their relationship
with the Pacific Islands, um, it's quite important
that they be part of the discussion and part negotiation.
Um, so that's just a comment based on
what I didn't see in the NIAI would like to know
because in accordance with the NIA, it does talk about, um,
that there is going to be, uh, accountability around,
um, IUU
and this is something we discussed previously, um,
that this agreement will help towards that and all of those.
But so far we haven't seen it.
I mean, this particular agreement has been around
for a while, but I, IUU is more rampant than ever.
So what do you mean by the fact that they're able
to address it and what's specifically NX two that provides,
I guess, more accountability to IUU
and also on the similar vein, what's the work,
because we're talking about tuna here, who is in charge
of monitoring the tuna depletion rate
within the area as well?
Okay. Um, on the issue of IUU
and the, the nerve center of, of the Pacific parties
to the US Tuna Treaty is the Forum Fisheries Agency.
So, um, the 16 Pacific parties are all members of the FFA.
Um, the FFA, um, uh, is both the home to and the, and,
and the, the sort of administrative headquarters of, of the,
um, regional Fishery surveillance center.
Um, which, for example, it runs four exercises a year
with partners, um, multi-agency from New Zealand, uh,
international paid for by Australia.
And it's really upskilling the, the, um, the Pacific, uh,
um, administrative capacity to police the waters for IUU,
uh, that was very much covered by this committee's, um,
inquiry into IU fishing, um, that, that concluded in 2023.
Uh, so on that, the relevance, uh, the additional relevance
of the US RY here is that, um, the US uh,
through Indo Paycom has been helping
to support the operations
of the Regional Fisheries Surveillance Center, um,
having the US presence, um,
quite literally invested in the wellbeing
of Pacific Fisheries
and supporting, um, the, uh, in this case, the, the it
of the, the Fishery Surveillance Center is an
important part of the treaty.
Uh, rather than sort of looking at the, um, uh,
the fine finer detail of, of the actual treaty,
which is important is, is also stepping back
and saying, this is about the US commitment to ensuring
that, uh, you know, the resources
of the Pacific are managed transparency transparently
and responsibly for the benefit
of the Pacific Island countries.
All right. Next question, Greg.
Cl k, uh, the reduction of the US fleet is that ongoing
and then what are the reasons driving it?
It is ongoing and it's,
it's essentially about profitability.
It's, it's also, um, there are, there used
to be two fish processing facilities in PGA Pena.
That's down to two.
One, um, that there is a, you know, a significant, um,
fleet operates out of Hawaii.
Uh, that's where the votes are based, I think.
But other than that, I think it's just
the economics of the industry.
And you just follow up question.
Are you seeing, just in terms of the observations
before of of the
Nations that will fill up that gap,
are you seeing any change in terms
of the US response to that?
Uh, we're not seeing a, a change in terms of, uh,
war commercial activity from the United States.
Uh, but, uh, you know, the, the activities of any number
of countries operating in the region are constantly under,
um, under monitoring, um, and discussion.
Uh, the, the country's concerned are all members
of the Western Central Fisheries, um,
the Pacific Fisheries Commission.
Uh, and I, I guess the point of reassurance there is
that this is the most successful,
successfully sustainable managed RFMO in the world.
Uh, also one of the biggest.
Okay, thank you.
I mean, what percentage of the total Pacific area, uh, that
the tune I found in would be covered by eecs?
Um, I don't dunno the answer to that off the top
of my head, but that map that we attached
to your briefing shows that it's pretty much all easy
for the few pockets of, of high seas,
But it doesn't show, I guess that to,
and I guess the turn aren't in the Northern Pacific as much.
No, I, I guess just looking at the figures,
so it's worth about $6 billion a year.
Mm-hmm. And,
and while the US is the only player, um,
do we have an estimate of the, of the return to the Pacific
Nations from that $6.1 billion in total value?
Um, we have a figure on
roughly about 2 billion.
2 billion, yeah, about, that's right.
Two, 2 billion of the six.
So the, the remainder would be value, um, added
through processing transshipment and the like.
Okay. So that comes by way of direct
GDP and
Yes. Runs
Through. Okay, thank you.
Revenue streams including, for example, the rentals paid
for, for access to the waters.
Yeah. I'm interested in an update on the
ratification process.
Can you tell us how many countries so far have completed?
And just to reiterate, you mentioned that it requires all
countries to rectify before it comes into for
what happens if someone does not.
Yeah, so currently there's one other party
that has ratified, um, the Marshall Islands.
Um, and so it would be near kind of the beginning, uh,
that's the MOUI mentioned is that interim measure,
which ensures that the commercial arrangements can still
continue until such time as the meetings come into effect.
Um, and I guess it recognizes that with a, a treaty
of the size, it can take some time for parties to work
with their domestic gratification processes. Mm-hmm.
And so that MOU is effectively in perpetuity until,
Until such time as the amendments come into effect.
Yes. Okay. Alright. Thank you. Any final questions?
Wonderful. Alright. Thank you very much for your time.
Appreciate your insights into that. No, thank you. Cheers.
Thank you. Okay. Our next submission is via Zoom.
We Hopefully have Pauline Tony
order all present
Last year, one of the most amazing experiences of my life.
Okay. She's just joining us.
That's their run.
They come to feed. Yeah, man.
Catching their bluefin tuna was
just, I caught one last year.
One on the es experiences on my life. Okay.
Up at the North Cape. Amazing. Yeah, it was s**t odd
To see it there, but yeah,
We've had a big, um, surge of Pacific Group announced.
Yeah. And it was Oh, thanks. Very the village.
Okay. We're just waiting for Pauline to join us.
Pauline, if you can hear us, you need
to accept the invitation to join.
Thank you. Um, that has been sent through to you.
Thanks. Sometimes you need the full
sugar every,
Every time.
I've gone back to 10:00 PM
Before midday.
Okay. She is present there.
Okay. Yeah.
Pauline, uh, is your camera on?
Ah, this looks like there may be progress.
Oh,
Sorry. I can't even
get the screen going.
I'm, I'm normally quite good at this
Technology.
It's ups and downs, doesn't it? We at least we can hear you.
We can't see you yet, but, uh, we can hear you now.
Can you hear us all right?
Yeah, we can. So you,
they can't see you, but they can hear you.
So I'm just gonna pass it over to Pauline.
I'm nearly the person pressing the buttons. All right.
Are you able to get the camera up for us?
Um, I can try.
Why is it not working though? Stop video.
Okay. Well look, we might crack into it
just from a time perspective.
Um, so we had 10 minutes set down for, uh,
today's discussion with Pauline.
Um, we don't have a written submission to go from, so, uh,
we will hand over to you for your comments
on the Tuna Treaty.
Bill, thank you
Comments for the Uni us Turner Treaty.
Bill,
Thank you for hearing me this morning.
I can't see anybody because I can't see anymore,
but I have just a few comments to make.
Firstly, many of our people are concerned
that this bill was come to the house in such a hurry.
I think most of you in Parliament know that
our people on the road for tongue and,
and over Christmas holiday, so they're not able
to meet, to talk about these bills.
This particular bill concerns me
because 1982 I was at the environmental
conference in Rio
and I was, had the privilege of meeting Ya Costo.
And one of the things Jack Costo said to me, be weary
of your Pacific Ocean,
because he said, look, we better last resort
for foreign agents.
And I'm seeing that already with this.
We could have asked now going with China
confirmed our people who also fish the tuna.
And I think the bill has to be very, very strong to stay
that anybody in the Pacific Forum that gets involved with an
overseas company like China, America,
that they have to first consider
of their own people at home.
So there's many other things that Jack spoke to me about,
which is coming to fruit.
That is my main point, those two points. Thank you.
Excellent. Thank you very much.
Have we got any questions for Paul?
All right. Thank you very much for your time
submitting on this bill.
We appreciate your insights
and, uh, thank you for being able to work
through those technical challenges as well.
Thank you. Take care.
Okay, that brings us to an end
of our hearings on that bill.
We will move now to the international trade examination
of the agreement on climate change, trade
and sustainability.
So we have Christopher Norton
scheduled for 10 30.
He's joining in person, presumably.
All right. Good morning, Christopher Norton. Excellent.
Great to have you with us today.
Uh, we are continuing our consideration
of the agreement on climate change,
trade and sustainability.
We have seen your written submission
and welcome your comments.
We have 10 minutes set down for, uh,
today's admission with you.
Uh, and I'm sure there,
there may be some questions from members
as well. So over to you.
Alright, Kiata.
Um, yes, you've seen my very brief submission.
Um, it was written in rather hurry
because I ran across the entire thing very late on the, uh,
submission closing date.
So it's like, oh, I might have something to say about this.
Um, yes, thank you for the opportunity to talk
and, um, the reason I've, I decided to submit on this is
because it struck me as a treaty that, um,
actually is potentially a very key component
to actually the world moving on with, uh, reasonable
and sustainable and actionable action on climate change
and, um, reducing the impact of that.
Um, a little bit about me. I'm, well, I'm 56 now.
Um, and, uh, I've watched various governments of ours,
but also across the world have various, goes
with varying levels of commitment
and authenticity at addressing, uh, climate change.
And this treaty,
even though there are at the moment only I could say four,
uh, signatories to it, this treaty looks like one of those
that could actually have some real impact,
particularly when it comes to, uh, it's intent,
it's intention to reduce the subsidies on fossil fuels, um,
because fossil fuels are burning off.
'em is the reason why we happen to be facing the poly crisis
that is climate, the climate crisis, climate change,
and the biodiversity crisis.
So, um, I think this is a good treaty.
Uh, um, you know, I actually came here to say
this is something I can really get behind.
I I already have no beef with this or,
or any other kind of, um, protein product
with this, um, treaty.
And while there are clearly some things
that could be improved, for example, the fact that it, um,
puts aside the extraction of, um, fossil fuel type materials
for the production of plastics, um,
and you know, having been one of those people
who scoured the beaches looking for trash, that's, um,
you know, the debris of our civilization,
plastics are a problem, um,
that we really need to get to address.
This is a good treaty
and, um, to get hung up on some of the details about
where it's not perfect, I think we just need to move on
and, um, consider this to be one of those places
where New Zealand can, um, go to the world
and encourage others to seriously
consider joining the treaty.
Um, and then as a consequence of that
and their implementation, actually look at reducing their
fossil fuel subsidies.
Um, I realize that our subsidies
and fossil fuels have historically been declining
and they're not that large.
That is not true with our trading partners.
Um, and, uh, I think if we can do it
and we can maintain our integrity, um, when it comes to, um,
extraction of fossil fuels in this country,
then we can encourage others to do it
and it becomes sensible for them to join this treaty
and use that as the way in which they can, uh,
reduce their subsidies on fossil fuels.
So yeah, that's, that's really what I'm here to say.
I'm, I'm very interested in the future, um,
the future for my children.
I have three and, and whatever grandkids
may, may come down the line.
Um, I want them to live in a planet which is not a
climate driven hellscape.
Uh, and, and I think this is one way
that we can encourage the world to actually reconsider,
um, and make different choices.
Choices where our kids do actually have a viable livable
future that we, I can,
can everyone in the room say we have enjoyed and let's try
and pass that on so that they too have a, um,
a lived experience which they too can enjoy.
Um, got very
Good. Alright, thank you very much
for that summary
question from Killer.
Look, thank you very much and,
and uh, through a brief submission, you
so retain our integrity.
Do you have any concerns about our consistency of approach
to this whole agreement?
I will be honest, when I was reading this,
I felt like it came from a different era.
Um, and there's been events both, um, here
and overseas which indicate that, um, you know,
we are in danger as a civilization
of taking our eyes off the ball of the, uh, connection
between the extraction of fossil fuels,
the burning those fossil fuels and the livable future.
Um, and so, you know, New Zealand made a, um,
significant international statement when it, uh, pulled out
of licensing, um, new offshore, uh, oil and gas exploration.
Um, and I think that's important to that, that was there
for the integrity of this agreement
and our, you know, we actually started writing this,
um, A-C-C-T-S.
So we need to maintain our integrity as a nation when comes
to promoting the A-C-C-T-S by what we do at home.
Very good. Any further questions?
Alright, thank you very much for your submission. Thank you.
Appreciate the, uh, indicative support. Mm-hmm.
Nothing's perfect, of course,
but uh, I agree it's good progress.
Thank you. Okay,
we move now to the New Zealand Forest Owners Association
What processing wood process and,
and wood processes. Sorry
To answer Submiss.
There is a slight difference.
Yes, I agree. Understand.
And I know we've, uh, heard from you recently on our non
tariff barriers piece as well.
Right over to you. Thank you.
Um, right now Thank you Mr.
Chairman and uh, for the opportunity to present
to you today on the agreement on climate change
change sustainability.
My name's Mark Cross from the Wood Process
and Manufacturers Association
and with me is Elizabeth Hi from the New Zealand Forest
Owners Association.
Howard in submission outlines our core views on the acts
and we would like to now highlight a few key
points as general statement.
We are in support of the acts.
We are really pleased to see what being classified
as an environmental good within the acts text
and understand that New Zealand negotiate negotiated were
part to secure this inclusion having 45 wood products.
This is at its priority products with wood processing.
Forestry industry within acts highlights the important role
wood plays globally and meeting our net zero carbon
emissions 2050 goal.
This has the potential to open up new opportunities
for New Zealand wood product exporters
and support industry growth,
which will provide benefits both to the New Zealand economy
and our global environment.
We found the trade officials
with the hard work in gaining support for wood
as environmental good
and encourages the same negotiations on wood
and forestry take place within the future trade agreements
where the opportunity arises.
We also support of the list
of environmental goods being reviewed regularly
and additional environmental goods such as byproducts
of forestry being added in the future to X.
We acknowledge that with a small number
of countries currently included with it
and acts that this agreement will take time to show benefits
to New Zealand trade in the wider environment.
However, it's high within our submission by being designed
as not open lateral agreement.
There ability for our core trading nations with WTO
to join X in the future,
thus supporting growth in our export markets
for environmental and sustainable goods such
as wood products and wool.
Any removal of trade associated non tariff barriers is
benefit beneficial to encouraging
export growth in our industry.
We commend and support the government on completion
of necessary domestic procedures,
see the new trade agreement fully enacted.
And I'd like to pass on to Elizabeth.
Um, I just say on behalf of, uh, forest owners that
I think having, uh,
plu lateral agreements like this not only shows New
Zealand's leadership in the space
of producing environmental goods,
but it also really encourages globally that conversation
around how we can have more sustainable building, how,
how we can meet what is, um, the food
and agriculture organization in their state
of forest last year forecast to be a gap
between a real high demand for wood and for natural products
and actually our ability to meet that.
So agreements like this are really important for us
to move into that space where we're meeting the demand
that we have globally for natural products
and for more sustainable systems.
Excellent. First question, honorable Damien O'Connor.
Thank you. Um, uh, understand the value of wood.
Um, but if forest owners are selling raw logs
to go offshore just to be used in wasteful boxing,
how is that contributing to long-term sustainability?
So with this agreement, actually the environmental goods
that are included are largely processed as I understand it.
So I'm really here in support
of us doing more processing on shore.
You are? Mm-hmm.
That's great to hear from the forest owners.
If you look at the 45 wood products they are or process.
So the more we can process the
New Zealand and seeing of Sure. The better. Yeah.
Great. Dr. Lawrence. Nan,
Thank you. Um, following
up from on the Bo Damian Connor's question,
if we are looking at, you mentioned
before, you know, would um,
well I guess wood products in this, in some
of these cases would be consider as environmental good.
And you're talking about economic growth
and et cetera, et cetera.
How does an increase in the number of freights
and the emissions that is generated from freights be
considered beneficial to climate change and environment?
Well, we're really looking at efficiencies in that space
for multiple reasons.
Um, one is that forestry
and wood processing are really concerned about our overall
environmental footprint.
You know, we we're,
we are focused on meeting climate obligations that
that's one of our cornerstones of,
and one of the things we're proudest of in, in forestry is
that, you know, trees are the ancient
and proven technology that we have
that works really well right now for sequestering carbon.
And we'd like to see more recognition across the value chain
of, of both how we can, it's sequester carbon in buildings
and through that wider forestry
and wood processing value chain,
but also how we build efficiencies in there.
Um, and, and part of that is, is based on the emissions,
but also is based on the fact
that global shipping right now, um, is under pressure.
Mm-hmm. So it's, it's sensible for us to look at, um,
agreements like this that recognize the environmental goods,
but also encourage us
to keep making those efficiencies along the supply chain.
Supplementary question, um, just on the
part you mentioned about sequestration, um, can I just check
that when you are looking at environmental goods, do either
of you separate what is considered environmental good
or wood product as a result of a monoculture
or as part of something that we are looking at in terms
of increasing, let's say indigenous
biodiversity and et cetera?
Is that, I mean, you are the experts, is that something
that you would consider or they're all lumped together
as environmental goods, whether they're part
of a monoculture pine forest or anything?
So just trying to understand the question.
Um, you know, we're supporting wood products.
We don't export indigenous, um, wood products offshores.
So I just trying to work out how the questions related to
the export and process in wood products.
I I could take a stab at it if you, if you like.
So, so in terms of what kind of wood we're producing? Yeah.
I, I think, um, it's important to recognize
that the reason we have the pine monoculture in New Zealand
is because we were conserving our native timbers.
Mm-hmm. So that took the, um, economic pressure off
of native native timbers, which, you know, at the turn
of the 20th century were used for butter boxes
and things that were really short term uses.
And by having a, a Pine and Douglas Fe
and some of these other, um, forestry
that are exotic species.
Mm-hmm. Um, but, but having those species, we were able to
continue to produce timber for housing
and timber for shorter term uses.
Mm-hmm. Um, that then wasn't impacting on our native forest.
So we, we do have programs around diversification both in,
um, the non-native space
and then there's still a small native forestry industry.
It is, it is largely domestic and,
and there are folks
that are interested in looking at whether
or not we could grow that.
I think we would need to do that.
Um, I don't know that
that would necessarily end up being tied
to an agreement like this
because if we were gonna increase trade in that space,
we would wanna do it very carefully so
that we didn't have unintended consequences, um,
on those native forests.
So, so we've got a really good regime under
the Forest Act mm-hmm.
To manage those forests for some timber right now.
But it needs to be a really high value product.
And, and you know, if you're going to use Native Timber,
there's also questions about, um, indi uh,
the intellectual property and indigenous communities
and I think there's a lot to unpack in that space.
Yeah. And so right now the system we've got
is focused on sustainable production of exotic species.
I think there's space for us to open
that conversation back up about using other species
for production, but we'd want to do
that in a really considered way.
So we don't go back to a system
where we're exploiting native forests, um,
beyond what's sustainable,
Bigger advantage and longer sequestration
of native timbers sort of offset some of the other stuff
that we do in high productivity.
It's good stuff.
Final question dam on that issue,
'cause I know it comes up quite often is, is perhaps the,
um, the disincentive
or the reluctance of people
to expand indigenous forest plantations
and utilize the property, the fact that, uh, some
of the extreme green group
will oppose any utilization at all?
Well, you just have to look at what's happening in
Australia right now to see that, um, you know, in,
in their case there are some real questions about the
sustainability of Native timber industries
and actually state by state, several
of those have been shut down.
So I, there needs to be a balanced conversation.
I, I think native forestry
or closed canopy forestry,
there's a number of different names for it.
It can be done well and sustainably.
Um, and you can, you know, there's um,
a tribe in the United States, the Menominee,
that actually manage their forests so
that there's more productivity in the forest
that they're taking timber out of
and milling than there is in some of the adjacent forest
that's not as managed and doesn't have timber production.
There's some great examples like that globally around
how native forest
and mixed species forest can be managed
for commercial timber production.
I think in New Zealand we would need to progress on
that in a considered
and smart way so that we make sure we're,
we're valuing the timber
as it should be valued coming from a native forest
where it does, you know, to the point that, um, um,
Mr. Henry made that, that it is, um, valued.
You know, it's, it is grown for a hundred years,
it's a different kind of a, a timber than
what you grow in a pine forest for 30 years.
Um, but yeah, tho those are conversations
that I think would be great to have
and something that when we talk about environmental goods
and, and timber and,
and wool to a certain extent, making sure
that we're getting the value out of those products
that they deserve total.
Alright, thank you very much.
Mark and Elizabeth, appreciate your joint submission
on behalf of the Forest Owners Association, wood Processes
and Manufacturers Association.
Thank you very much. Thank you. Cheers. Cheers.
Okay, now we have a couple of next Okay.
Couple of online submissions next.
Uh, we are running a little ahead of schedule,
so we might just, uh, suspend the meeting for 10 minutes
and then we'll come back just before ten two next submitter.
Thank you.
Yeah.